Subtyping document (#579)
heliaxdev/juvix: doc/Architecture/Subtyping.org

* Subtyping
** An argument about the extent of subtyping

> Subtyping is an important part of any module or Object system. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subtyping is an important part of any module or object system. The
```

rules these systems usually care about revolve around the subtype of
=Records= and =Records= in relation to functions.

*** About Subtyping Rules on Records
An example of a record subtyping is as follows, we will use =a :> b= to
mean that =a= is a subtype of =b=

 1. ∀x, a \dots v : Type. {x : Type, a : Type \dots v : Type} :> {a \dots v : Type}
 2. ∀x, a \dots v : Type. ∀ f : {a : Type \dots v : Type} → Type \\
    f :> f : {x : Type, a : Type \dots v : Type} → Type

What 1 tells us is that we can /forget/ a field, and thus a record
with more fields is a sub type of the same record with less fields

What 2 tells us is that a function which accepts a record with fields
=a= through =v= can also accept a record with those fields /and/ extra
fields. The intuition is that in functions the sub typing relation is
reversed, but we still need to forget information to get our
relationship.

*** Implications of Rules and Arguments about Behavior

> These implications can be quite worrying, consider the longer form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These implications can be quite worrying, consider the longer-form
```

example below. We will introduce all the forms first then make an
argument about what various object systems have done and what we are
proposing to do.

#+begin_src ocaml
  f0 : λX:>{x : int} -> x1 -> x2 -> x1
  f0 rec1 rec2 = rec1 { x = rec1.x + rec2.x}

  f1 : λX:>{x : int} -> X -> X -> X
  f1 rec1 rec2 = rec1 {x = rec1.x + rec2.x}

  f2 : λX:>{x : int} -> X -> X -> X
  f2 rec1 rec2 = {x = rec1.x + rec2.x}

  -- note that the t is opaque
  sig set : int -> mod {x : t,  type t, add : t -> t -> t}
  mod set x =
    type t = int
    add = (+)
    x
  end

  -- We include the set

>   sig set : int -> mod {x : t,  type t, add : t -> t -> t}

Reviewer: `sig bag`, perhaps?

Author: yes

>   mod bag x = include (set x)

Reviewer: is this valid syntax?

Author: signature syntax isn't fleshed out yet, but the rest should be?

Author: I removed the mod word

  f1 (set 3) (bag 4)

>   foo a b c =

Reviewer: if you include this in the example we should explain it

Author: I did mention it once in regards to oleg's article but it isn't very explicit

Author: oh, you meant the f1 example.... well I removed it, I did update the section on foo and foo1 however

with OOP]], written by Oleg for how insidious this can make errors.

Thus on <2020-11-19 Thu> we have decided that f_{2} signature is invalid
as we don't just have a subtype of ={x : int}=, but in fact our return
type is ={x : int}=. Thus we don't have the issue of the function
=foo= in the article above, which we have labeled =foo= and =foo1=.

However what was more contentious was what to do with f_{1} vs f_{0}. Should
we allow

#+begin_src ocaml
  f1 {x = 5; y = 3} {x = 1}
#+end_src

if f_{1} were f_{0} then obviously yes, as we know we get two /seperate/
subtypes and return the first.

An argument for allowing this stems on the answer of
/This is how subtyping relations work/. While a fair argument, we have
concluded that either way is a valid way of working with sub typing,
as we can merely check the two arguments are the same, then begin
doing subtyping.

Another argument is around the flexibility of functors if we disallow
the above example. However this argument was also flawed in that we
still have a subtyping relation so f_{3} in our code block can be called
like
#+begin_src ocaml
  f3 {x = 3; y = 4}
#+end_src

> thus the argument on functors in a single argument can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus the argument regarding functors with a single argument can be
```

> disregarded. However, for multiple argument the legitimacy of the rest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disregarded. However, for multiple arguments the legitimacy of the rest
```

of the claim can be discredited by having a mechanism which allows the
user to specify that the two arguments are really subtypes of each
other. This explicit system still allows the mixup of =bag= and =set=
in Oleg's article, however it must be done so explicitly and full
intention, with the most serious error still being impossible!

Finally the last claim for f_{1}'s legitimacy rests on  flexibility of a
library user and the incorrect choices of the author. f_{1} should really
allow different subtypes, it just needs to specify it so! For this we
can gain back our expressiveness by adding an =coerce= function which
forgets fields to make the two records the same, and thus legitimate
in f_{1}
#+begin_src ocaml

>   f1 {x = 5; y = 3} (coerce {x = 1})

Reviewer: Wait what does this do? We can't add a `y` field, we don't have any value to put in it

Author: Fair, though I was hoping we could fix the type for the application, but you would be correct

  -- or
  f1 (coerce {x = 5; y = 3}) {x = 1}
#+end_src

*** Further Arguments/Unresolved Issues
As of <2020-11-19 Thu> we still don't have a full answer for the
following questions

> 1) How do we handle usages

Reviewer: At minimum, implicit coercion should fail for non-0 non-w record fields - explicit coercion (dropping fields) will be required.

* Subtyping
** An argument about the extent of subtyping

> Subtyping is an important part of any module or object system. The

Reviewer 2: I don't think Subtyping is a requirement for module/object system. I believe Row Polymorphism is better suited for this task and can be trivially implemented within the dependent typing discipline [citation needed]*.

* not sure about that but I think it's probably true.

Author: care describing the technical differences for me? It looks like row polymorphism is like subtyping for records only?

Doe it have the distinction that normal subtyping does not (see the f1, f0, and f2 examples)?

Reviewer 2: The main "problem" with subtyping is that it sometimes makes important information disappear, even for structural subtyping. I believe we can make this work with parametric polymorphism and row polymorphism, and  we can implement algebraic subtyping as a library or something that happens before core.

Author: I'd love to see this written up, could you say make a new section about this, and display the arguments and what we could do?

Reviewer 2: @mariari I will try to write it asap, and we can discuss next in the next architecture meeting.
